---
type: blog
subtype: wendland-weekly
publish: true
created: 2023-04-20
last_edited: 2023-04-20
chatgpt: false
---
# 2023-W16 Wendland Weekly

## Why is ~10 = -11 in python?

<span style="color:red;">Well what is ~10?</span>

The `~` is a [[Bitwise operations in Python|bitwise operation in Python]]. To be exact, it is the bitwise not operator. This means that it takes the [[Binary|binary]] representation of the provided number and flips all the 1's to 0's and vice versa.

<span style="color:red;">Ok ... then what is the binary representation of 10?</span>

In [[Python]], [[Integer|integers]] are stored as [[Signed or unsigned integers|signed integers]] using the [[Two's complement]] representation. In fact, Python is even more complicated because [[Integer|integers]] are dynamically sized as well. For our sake, let's just say it is stored in a [[Byte|byte]] of 8 [[Bit|bits]]. So, 10's byte representation would be `0000 1010`.

<span style="color:red;">So then we have 1111 0101... what number does this represent in Two's complement... and don't just say -11.</span>

Well, `1111 0101` is negative (the most significant digit which for us is to the left is 1), so you need to do some work to find the decimal representation. First, subtract 1, giving `1111 0100`. Then, flip the digits to `0000 1011`. Lastly, we use that basic [[Binary|binary]] representation, but with a minus sign in front of it... i.e. (-) 8 + 2 + 1 = -11.

<span style="color:red;">Ahh ok, well don't you feel smart. Seems like a lot of effort for something so minor.</span>

There is an easier way to think about this operation. For positive numbers (of which 0 is one), we start from 0 and carry on up to as much as your memory can take. Whereas for negative numbers, we start at -1 and continue down. The bitwise not operation in the [[Two's complement]] representation switches a number between positive and negative but keeps its relative position in the index. So, `~4 = -5` or `~(-7) = 6`.

<span style="color:red;">Nice... well, that was a fun hole you got yourself into trying to work out why a ^ b ^ c returns the third element if two of them are the same. Congrats, Alex... you lost another evening.</span>


