---
checked: false
created: 2023-02-24
draft: false
last_edited: 2023-11-11
subtype: wendland-weekly
tags: []
type: blog
---
# 2023-W08 Wendland Weekly
This week I read about [[Markdown]], as I was using [[Obsidian]] quite a lot but realised I didn't fully grasp the concept of what is was built upon. I did this by reading a [markdown guide](https://www.markdownguide.org/) which was simplistic but useful.

As well as rehashing the syntax I already knew, I discovered new stuff I didn't know.
- You can put a foot note in using \[\^linking text\] to the footnote[^1],
- You can also align tables nicely using the ":", and
- When numbering items, in an ordered list the numbers you write don't matter!
Though I also discovered some [[Markdown]] syntax doesn't work in [[Obsidian]] such as superscript, subscript, definitions, emojis, and heading id's, though I think this is because [[Obsidian]] has other methods to achieve the same results.

I decided to look up what a [[Markup Language]] is. Essentially a method to declare how text is rendered, though it does get a bit philosophical about the difference between it and a [[Programming Language]]. There is a difference though, which is [[Markup Language]] is a [[Declarative Language]] whereas a [[Programming Language]] is an [[Imperative Programming|Imperative Language]]. Essentially, one say what you want to be whereas the other you tell the computer how to get there. Which is interesting as lots of [[DevOps]] is trying to be a [[Declarative Language]] such as [[Kubernetes]] and [[Terraform]].

Well that is it peeps, I managed to do the first [[Wendland Weekly Index|Wendland Weekly]]. May this habit stay with me!

## Questions left unsolved
- Do I really understand all the [[Obsidian]] syntax?
- What is the difference between a [[Markup Language]] and things like [[JSON]] and [[YAML]]?

[^1]: Like this!
